####Remember Who You Work For


It’s really easy to say “Make sure your goals and your work align with the 
goals of your business.” It’s really easy to say; it’s really hard to do, 
especially when you’re a programmer buried under so many organizational layers 
that you hardly know what your business is. Early in my career, I worked for a 
major package delivery company in a soft- ware development architecture team 
supporting the company’s revenue systems. This company was so encumbered with 
hierarchy, I never saw anything in my daily work that gave me even a glimpse
into the business of package delivery. I can remember my team attending 
quarterly all-hands meetings and feeling completely disjointed and alienated. 
“What is this achievement we’re celebrating? What do all of these metrics 
mean?”


Granted, at that point in my career, I was more interested in building elegant 
systems and hacking open source software than digging into the guts of a 
package delivery business. (OK, I admit it—I’m _still_ more more interested in 
those things.) But, had I really wanted to align my work with the major goals 
of the organization, I’m not sure I would have known where to begin.


So, it’s all fine and dandy to say we need to align our work with the goals of 
the company—to try to make sure we’re impacting the bottom line and all that. 
However, truth be told, many of us just don’t have visibility into how we can 
do this at the level from which we’re grasping. We can’t see the forest for the 
trees.


Maybe this one isn’t our fault. We may be asking too much of ourselves. Maybe 
the idea of trying to directly impact the company’s bottom line feels a bit 
like trying to boil the ocean. So, we need to take a more compartmentalized 
view, breaking the business into boilable puddles.


The most obvious puddle to start with is your own team. It’s probably small and 
focused enough that you can conceptually wrap yourself around it. You most 
likely understand the problems the team faces. You know what your team is 
focused on improving, be it productivity, revenue, error reduction, or anything 
else. If you’re not sure, you have one obvious place to go to find out: your 
manager.


Ultimately, in a well-structured environment, the goals of your manager are the 
goals of your team. Solve your manager’s problem, and you’ve solved a problem 
for the team. Additionally, if your manager is taking the same approach you 
are, the problems you’re solving for him or her are really his or her boss’s 
problems. And so on, and so on, until it rolls up to the highest level of your 
company or organization—the CEO, the shareholders, or even your customers.


By doing your small part, you’re contributing to the fulfillment of the goals 
of your company. This can give you a sense of purpose. It gives your work 
meaning.


Some may resist this strategy. “I’m not going to do his work for him.” Or, 
“She’s just going to take credit for my work!”


Well, yeah. Sort of. That’s the way it works. The role of a good manager is not 
to, as Lister and DeMarco say in _Peopleware_ [DL99], “play pinch hitter,” 
knowing how to do his or her whole team’s job and filling in when things get 
difficult. The role of a good manager is to set priorities for the team, make 
sure the team has what it needs to get the job done, and do what it takes to 
keep the team motivated and productive, ultimately getting done what needs to 
get done. A job well done by the team is a job well done by the manager.


*You manager’s successes are _your_ successes.*


If the manager’s job is to know and set priorities but not to personally _do_ 
all the work, then your job _is_ to do all the work. You are not doing the 
manager’s job for him or her. You’re doing your job.


If you’re really worried about who gets the credit, remember that it’s your 
_manager_ who holds the keys to your career (in your present company, at 
least). In most organizations, it’s the direct manager who influences 
performance appraisals, salary actions, bonuses, and promotions. So, the credit 
you seek is ultimately cashed in with your manager.


Remember who you work for. You’ll not only align yourself with the needs of the 
business, but you’ll align the business with _your_ needs. If you’re going to 
_nail_ the execution of your job, this will ensure that you’re executing on the 
right things.


Act on It!
1. Schedule a meeting with your manager. The agenda is for you to understand 
your manager’s goals for the team over the coming month, quarter, and year. Ask 
how you can make a difference. After the meeting, examine how your daily work 
aligns to the goals of your team. Let them be a filter for everything you do. 
Prioritize your work based on these goals.
