#### 27. Learn to Love Maintenance



Several years ago, I was involved in setting up a 250-person software
development center from scratch. We started with an empty building and were 
tasked with hiring and filling out an entire development organization. In 
setting up this development center, we faced a challenge we never expected. 
Everyone wanted to make new systems. Nobody wanted to maintain old systems. We 
wanted to create a new environment with an energized culture, so we had to pay 
attention to what our new employees _wanted_ if we were going to start off on 
the right path.



Everyone likes creating. That’s when we feel we are given the opportunity to 
really put our stamps on a piece of work. To feel like we own it. To express 
ourselves through our creation. We also tend to believe project work is the 
most visible to our organizations. The people who build the new generation are 
the ones who must get the glory, right? I knew this attitude to be prevalent 
from the previous programmers I had worked with. But, in dealing with a couple 
hundred software developers in what amounted to a human resources petri dish, I 
saw this to an extreme that I never expected.



Though software developers are typically creative, freedom-loving people, the 
programmer “society” is surprisingly caste-like. Programmers want to be 
designers, who want to be architects, and so on. Maintenance work gives them 
neither a notch in their belts nor a clear, elevated role (such as _architect_) 
that they can tell their parents or college buddies.



So, the motivating factors are the ability to be creative and the chance to 
make steps toward a promotion. The funny thing about it is that project work is 
_not_ necessarily the best place to do either.



Maintenance work is typically littered with old, rotting systems and pushy end 
users. Since the software is thought of as being done, IT departments are 
usually focused on reducing the cost of maintaining these systems, so they look 
for the cheapest possible way to keep the systems running.



That usually amounts to too few resources being assigned to look after the 
systems and no significant investment dollars being pumped into rejuvenating 
the systems.



Project work, on the other hand, is where you start with a nice, clean, green 
field. In a well-run company, every project contributes to either making or 
saving money, so the projects are usually funded sufficiently for the work to 
be done (though, experiences may vary here). There is no existing minefield of 
old code that the programmers have to tiptoe carefully through so they can 
develop features “right” with fewer hindrances than if they were working on an 
existing system. In short, the circumstances in project land are usually much 
more ideal.



If I give you $1,000 and ask you to go get me a cup of coffee, I’m going to be 
very unhappy if you return with 1,000 less dollars and no cup of coffee. I’m 
even going to be unhappy if you bring me plenty of really nice coffee but it 
takes you two hours. If I give you $0 and ask you to go get me a cup of coffee, 
I’ll be extremely appreciative if you actually return with the coffee, and I’ll 
be understanding if you don’t. Project work is like the first scenario. 
Maintenance is like the second.



When we don’t have the constraints of bad legacy code and lack of funding to 
deal with, our managers and customers rightfully expect more from us. And, in 
project work, there is an expected business improvement. If we don’t deliver 
it, we have failed. Since our companies are counting on these business 
improvements, they will often put tight reins on what gets created, how, and 
by when. Suddenly, our creative playground starts to feel more like a military 
operation—our every move dictated from above.



*Maintenance can be a place of freedom and creativity.*



But in maintenance mode, all we’re expected to do is keep the software running 
smoothly and for as little money as possible. Nobody expects anything flashy 
from the maintenance crew. Typically, if all is going well, customers will stay 
pretty hands-off with the daily management of the maintainers and their work. 
Fix bugs, implement small feature requests, and keep it running. That’s all you 
have to do.



What if a bug turns up the need to redesign a subsystem in the application? 
That’s all part of bug fixing, right? The designs may be old and moldy, and 
broken windows10 may be scattered throughout the system. That’s an opportunity 
to put your refactoring chops to the test. How elegant can this system be? How 
much faster can you fix or enhance this section next time because of the 
refactoring you’re doing this time?



As long as you’re keeping it running and responding to user requests in a 
timely fashion, maintenance mode is a place of freedom and creativity. You are 
project leader, architect, designer, coder, and tester. You can flex your 
creative abilities all you like, and measurable success or failure of the 
system is yours to bear.



When you’re maintaining a system, you can also plan for more visible 
improvements. Your three-year-old web system might not take advantage of some 
of the snappy new user interface features available to modern web browsers. If 
you can work it in between keeping the system running and making bug fixes, you 
could visibly enhance the user experience with the system. Adding a few 
well-placed bells and whistles your customers weren’t expecting is not too 
different from surprising your wife with flowers or, as a kid, cleaning the 
house while your parents were out shopping. And, without the bureaucracy of a 
full-blown project underway, you’ll be surprised at just how much you can fit 
into those cracks. Your customers will be too.



A hidden advantage of doing maintenance work is that, unlike the contractual 
environment of many of today’s project teams, the maintenance programmer often 
has the opportunity to interact directly with his or her customers. This means 
that more people will know who you are, and you’ll have the chance to build a 
larger base of advocates in your business. It also puts you in a prime spot for 
truly learning the inner workings of your business. If you’re responsible for a 
business application in its entirety, always working with its end users through 
problems and questions, chances are that even without much effort, you will 
come to understand what the application actually does as well as many of its 
business users. Business rules are encoded into application logic that 
businesspeople can’t usually read. I’ve seen many situations where it was only 
the maintenance programmers who fully understood how a specific business 
process in a company worked. No one else had direct exposure to the 
authoritative encoding of that business logic.



The big irony surrounding the project vs. maintenance split is that project 
work is maintenance. As soon as your project team has written its first line of 
code, each additional feature is being grafted onto a living code base. Sure, 
the code might be cleaner or there might be less of it than if you were working 
on a legacy application, but the basic act is the same. New features are being 
added to and bugs are being fixed in existing code. Who knows how to do this 
better and faster than someone who has truly embraced maintenance programming 
and made it a mission to learn how to do it well?



Act on It!
1. _Measure, improve, measure_—For the most critical application or code that 
you maintain, make a list of _measurable_ factors that represent the quality of 
the application. This might be response time for the application, number of 
unhandled exceptions that get thrown during processing, or application uptime. 
Or, if you handle support directly, don’t directly assess quality for the 
_application_. Support request turnaround time (how fast you respond to and 
solve problems) is an important part of your users’ experience with the 
application.

Pick the most important of these measurable attributes, and start measuring it. 
After you have a good baseline measurement, set a realistic goal, and improve 
the application’s (or your own) performance to meet that goal. After you’ve 
made an improvement, measure again to verify that you really made the 
improvement you wanted. If you have, share it with your team and your customers.

Pick another metric, and do it again. After the first one, you’ll find that it 
becomes fun, like a game. Measurably improving things like this gets addictive.












10. For more on broken windows, see The Pragmatic Programmer [HT00].
